Maysan Province is one of the provinces of Iraq, in the southeastern of the country on the Iranian border, its capital is Al Amarah located on the Tigris, and the second-largest city of Maysan is the Al-Majar Al-Kabeer, and before 1976 it was known as the Amara Province. It is believed that the name was originally from the Kingdom of Mēs̲h̲ān, and then it turned to Maysan. Most historical references indicate that (Maysan) is a small country that originated in southern Babylonia under the protection of the Seleucid state (311 BC - 247 BC) when they weakened their affairs in the period between (223 BC - 187 BC) and it became independent and then moved up the ladder of power and became an important nation ruled by 23 monarchs for nearly three and a half centuries, specifically between 129 BC. M. 225 AD. It played a prominent role in political and economic events in Iraq during the period from the middle of the 2nd century B.C. to the first quarter of the 3rd century A.D.
Maysan in Aramaic means (swamp water) (Mai Asen). In Maysan, the tomb of (Prophet Uzair) is located and is sacred to Jews and Muslims. Likewise, the tomb of the Sharif Obaidullah bin Ali bin Abi Talib, in Qal’at Salih area specifically, and the tomb of the poet Al-Kumait bin Zaid Al-Asadi, which Kumait district was named after him.
Maysan was conquest during the reign of the second Caliph Umar ibn Al-Khattab by the Arab leader (Otba ibn Ghazwan Al-Mazni) and its borders extended between Wasit (Al-Kut) and Basra, Basra was part of it, as well as Al-Mazar and Al-Bataa '(Marshes), and it was reported in its history that it is a vast city with many villages and palm trees, and it was known for its fertility.
As for Amara, if it was pronounced (Omara) then it named after (Omara Bin Al-Hamza), which was appointed by the Abbasid Caliph Abu Jaafar Al-Mansour (136 AH - 158 AH) on the basin of the Tigris, which includes Maysan, Dastumian, and Abraqbath, and included the mandate of Basra and its territories. If it was (Amara) then it means a tribal grouping. And If it was (Emara) then its meaning is a new name for a new building and added to it (the definition) to fix the meaning and define it. 
Amara was mentioned in two works of literature two centuries ago. The name Amara, the River of Amara, and Kut Al-Amara are mentioned in several ancient works of no less than fifteen among a manuscript and a print in which the Arabic, Turkish, Persian, Italian, French, and English are printed. 
Amara's name mentioned in travels. The oldest of those arrived by the traveler, Sebastiani, in 1656 AD, and on his journey he talks about Amara, Mansuriyya, and Al-Majar, perhaps, they were inhabited islands where the Tigris River fades, and in the second journey, he talks about Amara as a village three days away from Baghdad and in which the Janissaries settled him in Customs House, that was in 1658 AD. Finally, Amara is one of the works of the Ottoman governor, Muhammad Namik Pasha (1278 AH - 1284 AH) / (1861-1867 AD), who established a camp on the Tigris River known as "the Urdu", meaning the legion, and then expanded to become a large city called (Al Amara), Lieutenant Colonel (Hussein Bey) took over the legion leadership, and then his successor (Muhammad Pasha Al-Diyar Bakrli), who built a market in the city called the Pasha, also built some buildings sufficient to accommodate the soldiers, and as a result of this urban movement, many people from different places arrived, and many buildings were constructed, for that, it was called Amara referring to the construction and the buildings in which it was built. The situation remained covered by military rule for a full year which is 1278 AH / 1861 AD. At the end of the year 1861 AD, the Shahani administration was issued from Istanbul to make Amara a district belonging to the state of Basra and appointed the Ministry of Interior in Astana (Abdul Qadir Al-Kulmendi) who was the clerk of Basra’s tribes as the district attorney for Amara, then he established the locality (Qadriya) and established the Great Mosque and the beacon in it. 
The poet Al-Baghdadi Abdul Ghaffar Al-Akhras, was dated the date of Amara founding, by saying:
You built it and it became Amara, as you wanted in your dreams.
Say to those who ask about its history, it was built during the days of Abdul Qadir.
Abdul Qadir is the administrator of the Ottoman state in which he was appointed in 1861 AD.
Sanjak al-Amara is located on the eastern shore of the Tigris River and is a place with serenity in the city, also the city included the government house (the Serail), a military barrack, a telegraph center, a customs center, a river administration building, a Roshdia school, 150 shops, and an elementary school. There are three public bathrooms and 1000 houses beside the reed houses and their residents who are (8000-9000) people.
Amara also has the seat of the Sani administration which is a government department that takes over the control of the property of the Sultan.
It takes to return from the city of Basra to the city of Amara by the river (24 hours) and it takes going (12 hours) due to water current. 
Among its district attachments are Qal'at Salih, Al-Kahla, and Duwairij (Al-Tayyib and Al-Halfaya). The tomb of Al-Uzair, as for the district of Qal’at Salih, it was previously called Al-Shatrah, then it was called Shatrah Al-Amara, to distinguish it from Shatrah Al-Montafik in Nasiriyah, that was in 1884. It was named Qal’at Salih after (Salih Sulaiman Al-Najdi) who was commissioned by the government of the Ottoman Empire to fight tribes that refrained from paying fees to the Ottoman Empire, and he who established a castle at the site where he had been camped. Which is now called Qal’at Salih (The castle of Salih).
Maysan Governorate consists of five districts in addition to the Amara District, which are:
Ali Al-Gharbi, Al-Maimuna, Al-Majar, Qal'at Salih, Al-Kahlaa.
In addition to nine townships: -
Ali Al Sharqi, Kumait, Al Musharrah, Al Salam, Al Khair, Al Adl, Bani Hashim, Al Uzair, Sayyid Ahmad Al Rifai
Amara owes its development to its excellent location, where the view from the deck of the ship looks beautiful thanks to its cornice, which extends by it in one line many beautiful two stories houses separated into many blocks by many straight and wide streets.
Amara consists of zones:
1-	Al-Qadriyah (Al-Jadida): It is the first locality built in Amara and it had an archeological beacon built by Abdul-Qadir Al-Kulamendi who became its Mutasarrif during the period (from 1861 AD to 1866 AD) and most of its residents were Jews and their homes are still there.
2-	Al-Saria: It is the locality built by Sri Pasha, the administrator of Amara in the era of the Ottoman Empire (1871-1874 AD). 
3-	A- Saray: It was named for its proximity to the Saray building, these two zones merged from the north on the cornice along the Tigris River before its branch to Al Kahlaa and the Al Musharrah. In Al Saray, there are two areas, one of them is Al Sawaria, which is a place to park the horses of the Ottoman police (gendarmerie) and the other region, Salmiya, which is the area near the governor’s house, now it was named Salmiya after Hajj Salim Mahmoud Al-Haj Mahdi, and it kept its name until the late 1940s.
4-	Mahmoudiyah: It was named after the Amara merchant Mahmoud Al-Haj Taha, as it was located within the borders of his garden.
5-	Al-Saboungieh: It was named after a soap-extraction plant, it has two areas (Mahmudiyah and Al-Sabounjieh) which they are combined.
6-	Shabana: It is the locality that is located on the right side of the Tigris River and Shabana is the place of the Turkish army and its borders extend from the opposite orchard to the present governor’s house and the Masakh.
7-	Al-Dabeesat: It is located northeast of Al-Amara via the Al Musharrah and Al-Kahla rivers.
8-	Al Majidia locality that was created in 1939 at the time of Al-Mutasarif Majid Mustafa (5/10/938 - 1/5/1941 AD) lies within the locality of the old Al-Dabeesat area. 
9-	The orchard of Awasha and Bustan Al Jiddah were orchards from the south, and there are only seven similar houses, which are palaces of the city rich merchants. and called (seven palaces).
